
FLIGHT INTO IMMORTALITY




The Discovery of the Pacific Ocean September 25, 1513



A Ship Is Outfitted



Upon his initial return from the discovered America, Columbus displays an infinite number of curiosities and precious things during his triumphant march through the crowded streets of Seville and Barcelona: red-skinned human beings of a previously unknown race, animals that have never been seen before, the colorful, screeching parrots, the ponderous tapirs, then remark able plants and fruits that will soon find their home in Europe: Indian corn, tobacco, and the coconut. All these things are looked at with amazement and curiosity by the cheering crowd, but what excites the royal couple and their advisors most are the few little chests and baskets filled with gold. It is not much gold that Columbus brings from the new India - a few ornaments that he obtained from the natives by trade or robbery, a few small bars and some handfuls of loose grains, gold dust more than gold - the entire haul at most enough to coin a few hundred ducats.

But the ingenious visionary Columbus, who always fanatically believes just what he wants to believe, and who has just as gloriously proven himself to be right about his sea route to India, brags with honest effusiveness that this is only a tiny first sample. He has received dependable reports concerning enormous gold mines on these new islands. The precious metal was said to lie there quite flat under a thin layer of earth in many fields. One could dig it up easily with a normal shovel. Further south, however, were kingdoms where the kings distributed gifts from vessels made of gold, and gold had less value than did lead in Spain. Intoxicated, the king, who is in eternal need of money, hears about this new Ophir that belongs to him. They still do not know Columbus and his sublime foolishness well enough to doubt his promises. Immediately a large fleet is outfitted for the second voyage, and recruiters and drummers are no longer need ed to hire crews. The news of the newly discovered Ophir, where gold can be picked up with bare hands, drives all Spain crazy. By the hundreds, by the thousands people pour in to travel to El Dorado, the land of gold.

But what a dismal flood it is that greed throws forth from all the cities and villages and hamlets. Not only honest noblemen apply, who want to gild their escutcheons thoroughly, not only audacious adventurers and brave soldiers, but all the dirt and scum of Spain is carried to Palos and Cadiz. Branded thieves, highwaymen, and footpads who are looking for more profitable work in the land of gold, debtors who want to flee from their creditors, husbands who want to flee from their cantankerous wives, all the desperados and failures, the branded and those being sought by the police report to the fleet, a crazily thrown together band of failures who are determined to become wealthy at last in a single venture, and in order to do so they are ready to commit any act of violence, any crime. So rabidly do they pass on to each other Columbus’s daydreams that in those countries one needs only to stick a shovel into the ground and the gold nuggets will immediately glitter forth, that the wealthier among the emigrants take servants and mules along in order to be immediately able to carry off the precious metal in large amounts. Those who do not succeed in getting accepted for the expedition force their way in by other ways. Without concerning themselves much about royal permission, wild adventurers outfit ships on their own just to get over there quickly and gather gold, gold, gold. At one stroke Spain is free of restless elements and dangerous riffraff.

In horror the governor of Española (later the Dominican Republic or Haiti) watches these uninvited guests flood the island that has been entrusted to him. From year to year the ships bring new freight and men who are more and more unruly. But the newcomers are just as disappointed, for gold does not lie loose on the streets here at all, and they can’t extract another grain of it from the unfortunate natives whom they attack like beasts. So these hordes wander and loiter around predaciously, a terror to the unhappy Indians, a terror to the governor. In vain he tries to turn them into colonizers by giving them land, cattle, and even plenty of human cattle, specifically sixty to seventy natives for each individual as slaves. But both the highborn noblemen and the onetime highwaymen have little inclination to be farmers. They did not come over here to plant wheat and herd cattle. Instead of attending to planting and harvest, they torture the unhappy Indians in a few years they will have exterminated the entire population – or sit in the taverns. In a short time most of them are in such financial straits that they must sell their estates, followed by their coats, their hats, and their last shirts, and are up to their necks in debt to the merchants and usurers.

It is therefore good news for all these failures on Española, that a well-respected man of the island, the lawyer, the university graduate Martín Fernández de Enciso, is outfitting a ship to come to the aid of his colony on the continent. In 1509, two famous adventurers, Alonzo de Ojeda and Diego de Nicuesa had received from King Ferdinand the franchise to establish a colony near the Straits of Panama and the coast of Venezuela, which they had somewhat hastily called Castilla del Oro, Gold Castile. Intoxicated by the sound of the name and beguiled by tall tales, the scholar of the law, who was unacquainted with the world, had invested his entire fortune in this undertaking. But from the newly established colony in San Sebastian on the Gulf of Uraba there comes no gold but only a shrill cry for help. Half of the men have been wiped out in the battles with the natives, and the other half are starving.

In order to save the invested money, Enciso risks the rest of his fortune and outfits a relief expedition. They have hardly heard the news that Enciso needs soldiers when all the desperados, all the loafers of Española want to take advantage of the opportunity and leave with him. They just want to get away, to escape from their creditors and the strict governor’s watchfulness. But the creditors are also on their guard. They realize that their worst debtors want to run away from them never to be seen again, and so they urge the governor not to let anyone depart without his special permission. The governor agrees to their request. A strict surveillance is established. Enciso’s ship has to remain outside the harbor. Government boats patrol and prevent any unauthorized man from smuggling himself aboard. And with immeasurable bitterness all the desperados, who are less afraid of death than of honest work or the debtor’s prison, watch as Enciso’s ship steers its way toward adventure under full sail without them.



The Man in the Box



Under full sail Enciso’s ship steers from Española toward the American mainland. The outlines of the island have already sunk into the blue horizon. It is a quiet voyage, and at first nothing special happens, only perhaps this, that an especially strong and powerful bloodhound-he is the son of the famous Becericco and has become famous himself under the name of Leoncico – restlessly walks up and down the deck and sniffs around every where. Nobody knows who owns the powerful animal or how it came aboard. Finally they also notice that it cannot be moved from the vicinity of an especially large box of provisions that was brought aboard on the last day in port. But lo and behold, unexpectedly this box opens by itself, and an approximately thirty-five-year-old man climbs out of it, well armed with a sword, a helmet, and a shield, like Santiago, the patron saint of Castile. It is Vasco Nuñez de Balboa who in this manner gives the first sample of his amazing audacity and ingenuity.

Born of a noble family in Jerez de los Caballeros, he had sailed to the New World as an ordinary soldier with Rodrigo de Bastidas and after many an odyssey had been stranded with the ship in the vicinity of Española. The governor had tried in vain to make an honest colonist of Nuñez de Balboa, but after a few months he left behind the land that had been allocated to him and was bankrupt to the point that he did not know how to save him self from his creditors.

But while the other debtors stare from the beach with clenched fists at the government boats that make it impossible for them to flee to Enciso’s ship, Nuñez de Balboa audaciously circumvents the cordon of Diego Columbus by hiding in an empty provisions box and having accomplices carry him aboard, where, in the tumult of the departure, nobody becomes aware of the insolent deception. Only when he knows that the ship is so far from the coast that they will not turn back on his account does the stowaway make himself known. Now he is here.

The university graduate Enciso is a man of law, and like most jurists he has little feeling for the romantic. As the judge, the minister of police of the new colony, he does not intend to tolerate swindlers and shady characters there. He therefore gruffly declares to Nuñez de Balboa that he has no intention of taking him along, but that he will put him ashore on the next island they pass, no matter whether it is inhabited or not.

But things do not go that far. While still heading for the Castilla del Oro the ship meets – a miracle in those times when a total of only a few dozen ships travel on these still unknown seas – a heavily manned boat, commanded by a man whose name will soon resound across the world, Francisco Pizarro. Its crewmen come from Enciso’s colony San Sebastian, and at first they are taken to be mutineers who have left their post without authorization. But to Enciso’s horror they report: San Sebastian no longer exists; they themselves are the last remnants of the former colony. Commander Ojeda cleared out with a ship; the rest, who possessed only two brigantines, had to wait until enough had died that there were only seventy people left, so that there would be room for them in these two small boats. Of these two brigantines, one has now been wrecked. Pizarro’s thirty-four men are the last survivors of Castilla del Oro. Now where do they go?

After hearing Pizarro’s stories, Enciso’s people have little desire to expose themselves to the terrible, swampy climate of the abandoned settlement and the poisoned arrows of the natives. To return to Española seems to them to be the only possibility. At this dangerous moment Vasco Nuñez de Balboa suddenly steps forward. From his first voyage with Rodrigo de Bastidas, he declares, he knows the entire coast of Central America, and he remembers that at that time they had found a place named Darien on the banks of a gold-bearing river where there were friendly natives. There, and not at this place of misfortune, they should establish the new settlement.

Immediately the entire crew sides with Nuñez de Balboa. In accordance with his recommendation they steer toward Darien on the Isthmus of Panama, immediately begin the usual slaughter among the natives, and when it is found that there is also gold among the plundered possessions, the desperados decide to begin a settlement here. And in pious gratitude they then call the new town Santa Maria de Ia Antigua del Darien.



Dangerous Ascent



Soon the unfortunate financier of the colony, the university graduate Enciso, will greatly rue the fact that he did not throw the box containing Nuñez de Balboa overboard in time, for after only a few weeks this audacious man has all the power in his hands. As a jurist who has grown up with the ideas of discipline and order, Enciso, in his capacity as a chief judge representing the currently missing governor, attempts to govern the colony for the benefit of the Spanish crown and issues his decrees from the miserable Indian hut just as clearly and strictly as if he were sitting in his lawyer’s office in Seville. In the middle of this wilderness that has never before been visited by civilized men, he forbids the soldiers to trade with the natives for gold, because this is a prerogative of the Spanish crown. He attempts to force order and laws upon this undisciplined mob, but the adventurers instinctively side with the man of the sword and revolt against the man of the pen. Soon Balboa is the real lord of the colony. In order to save his life, Enciso is forced to flee, and when Nicuesa, one of the continental governors who has been appoint ed by the king, finally arrives to establish order, Balboa does not let him land at all, and the unfortunate Nicuesa, driven from the land that has been awarded him by the king, drowns during the return voyage.

Nuñez de Balboa, the man from the box, is now lord of the colony. But in spite of his success he does not feel very comfort able. For he has committed open rebellion against the king and has all the less hope of pardon because the appointed governor met his death as a result of what he did. He knows that the de parted Enciso is on his way to Spain with his accusation, and that sooner or later the authorities must sit in judgment upon his rebellion. But, after all, Spain is far away and he still has a lot of time before a ship has crossed the ocean twice. As clever as he is audacious, he searches for the only means to maintain his usurped power as long as possible. He knows that in that era success justifies any crime and that a substantial delivery of gold to the royal treasury can assuage or delay any criminal proceedings. So the first thing is to obtain gold, for gold is power

Together with Francisco Pizarro he subjugates and robs the natives of the vicinity, and amid the usual slaughter he achieves a decisive success. One of the native Indian chiefs, whose name is Careta, whom he has treacherously attacked while seriously violating the rules of hospitality, suggests to him while already under sentence of death, that instead of making enemies of the Indians he should enter a treaty with his tribe. He offers him his daughter as a pledge of fidelity. Nuñez de Balboa immediately recognizes the importance of having a dependable and powerful friend among the natives. He accepts Careta’s offer, and what is even more astounding, he remains very tenderly attached to that Indian girl right up to his final hour. Together with the Indian chief Careta, he conquers all the Indians in the vicinity and acquires such authority among them that finally even the most powerful chief, whose name is Comagre, respectfully invites him to visit.

This visit to the powerful chief brings about the historical decision in the life of Vasco Nuñez de Balboa, who until now has been nothing but a desperado and an audacious rebel against the crown, destined for the gallows or the axe of the Castilian courts. The chief Comagre receives him in a roomy stone house whose opulence gives rise to the greatest astonishment in Vasco Nuñez, and without being asked he gives his guest four thousand ounces of gold. But now it is the chief’s turn to be amazed. For hardly have the sons of heaven, the powerful, godlike foreigners whom he has received with such great reverence, caught sight of the gold when their dignity is gone. Like unleashed dogs they attack each other. Swords are drawn; fists are clenched. They scream, they rage against each other. Each wants his special share of the gold. With amazement and contempt the chief ob serves the rampage. It is the eternal amazement of all children of nature in every remote place on earth regarding civilized people for whom a handful of yellow metal seems more valuable than all the intellectual and technical achievements of their culture.

Finally the chief directs his words to them, and with a greedy thrill the Spaniards hear what the interpreter translates. “How peculiar it is,” says Comagre, “that you fight among yourselves over such trivial things, that you expose your lives to the great est discomforts and dangers for the sake of such a common metal. Over there, beyond those high mountains, lies an enormous sea, and all the rivers that flow into this sea carry gold in them. People live there who travel in ships with sails and rudders like yours, and their kings eat and drink from vessels made of gold. There you can find as much of this yellow metal as you want. It is a dangerous trip, for the chiefs will surely not permit you to pass, but it is a journey of only a few days.”

Vasco Nuñez de Balboa is deeply affected. At last he has found the trail to the fabulous land of gold of which they have dreamed for years and years. In every locale, in the south and in the north, his predecessors have looked for it, and now it lies only a few days’ journey away, if this chieftain has reported truthfully. At the same time the existence of that other ocean has also finally been established, the ocean to which Columbus, Cabot, Corereal, all the great and famous seafarers have sought the way in vain. With that, the way around the earth has actually also been discovered. Whoever is first to see this new ocean and take possession of it for his fatherland, his name will never be forgotten upon the earth. And Balboa recognizes the deed that he must do in order to buy his way free of all guilt and to acquire undying honor for himself: to be the first to cross the isthmus to the Mar del Sur, to the southern ocean that leads to India, and to conquer the new Ophir for the Spanish crown. With this hour in the house of the chief Comagre his fate has been decided. From this moment on the life of this incidental adventurer has a great, a timeless meaning.



Flight into Immortality



There is no greater happiness in the existence of a human be ing than to have discovered his life’s work in the middle of his life, in the creative years of his manhood. Nuñez de Balboa knows what is at stake for him – either a miserable death on the scaffold or immortality. First he must buy himself peace with the crown; after the fact he must legitimize and legalize his bad deed, his usurpation of power! For that reason, as the crown’s most zealous subject the rebel of yesterday sends the royal treasurer on Española, Pasamonte, not only the twenty percent of Comagre’s gift of gold that legally belongs to the crown, but, more experienced in the practices of the world than the skinny jurist Enciso, he also privately adds to the official consignment a liberal contribution to the treasurer, with the request that he confirm him in his office as captain-general of the colony. To be sure, the treasurer Pasamonte has no authority at all to do this, but for the good gold he sends Nuñez de Balboa a provisional but in reality worthless document.

Simultaneously, however, Balboa, who intends to make him self secure on all sides, has also sent two of his most dependable people to Spain, so that they can tell about his service to the crown and report the important information that he has wheedled out of the chief. He needs, Vasco Nuñez de Balboa has them report in Seville, only a troop of a thousand men. With it he volunteers to do more for Castile than any other Spaniard before him. He pledges to discover the new ocean and to win the land of gold that has finally been found, the land that Columbus promised in vain and that he, Balboa, will conquer.

Now everything seems to favor the lost man, the rebel and desperado. But the next ship from Spain brings bad news. One of his accomplices in the rebellion, whom he sent over at the time to refute the accusations of the plundered Enciso at the royal court, reports that the matter is now dangerous for him, even mortally dangerous. The swindled university graduate has succeeded in the Spanish court with his accusation against the usurper of his power, and Balboa has been condemned to pay him reparations. On the other hand, the news of the location of the nearby southern ocean, which could have saved him, has not yet arrived. In any case, with the next ship a judicial officer will arrive to call Balboa to account for his revolt and either condemn him right there or take him back to Spain in chains.

Vasco Nuñez de Balboa comprehends that he is finished. His condemnation took place before they received his news about the nearby southern ocean and the golden coast. Of course they will exploit it while his head rolls in the sand – somebody else will carry out his deed, the deed of which he has dreamed. He him self has nothing more to hope from Spain. They know that he drove the king’s legitimate governor to his death, that he high handedly drove the judge from his office. He will yet have to call the judgment merciful if it only sentences him to prison and he does not have to pay for his audacity on the execution block. He cannot count on powerful friends, for he himself no longer has any power, and his best advocate, the gold, still has too soft a voice to secure clemency for him. Only one thing can now save him from the punishment for his boldness – even greater boldness. If he discovers the other ocean and the new Ophir be fore the judicial officers arrive and their bailiffs capture and bind him, he can save himself. Only one form of flight is possible for him here at the end of the inhabited world, flight into a magnificent deed, flight into immortality.

So Nuñez de Balboa decides not to wait for the thousand men that he has requested from Spain for the conquest of the unknown ocean, much less for the arrival of the judicial officers. He would rather risk the enormous feat with a few similarly determined men! It is preferable to die in honor for one of the boldest adventures of all time than to be dragged bound to the scaffold in disgrace. Nuñez de Balboa calls the colony together. Without concealing the difficulties, he explains his intention to cross the isthmus and asks who wants to follow him. His courage emboldens the others. A hundred and ninety soldiers, almost the entire able-bodied population of the colony, declare themselves ready. There is not much need to obtain armaments and equipment because these people live in constant warfare anyway. And on September 1, 1513, to flee the gallows or the dungeon, Nuñez de Balboa, hero and bandit, adventurer and rebel, begins his march into immortality.



Undying Moment



The crossing of the Isthmus of Panama begins in that province of Coyba, the small empire of the Indian chief Careta whose daughter is Balboa’s wife. As it will turn out later, Nuñez de Balboa has not chosen the narrowest place, and through this ignorance he has lengthened the dangerous crossing by a few days. But for him it has to be important above all in such an audacious thrust into the unknown to have the security of a friendly Indian tribe for supplies or retreat.

In ten large canoes the troop crosses from Darien to Coyba, a hundred and ninety soldiers armed with spears, swords, harquebuses, and crossbows, accompanied by a large pack of the feared bloodhounds. The allied Indian chief provides his Indians as bearers and guides, and on September 6 that glorious march across the isthmus has already begun, a march that makes enormous demands even upon the will power of such audacious and tested adventurers.

In stifling, fatiguing equatorial heat the Spaniards must first cross the lowlands whose swampy, fever-filled ground will still murder many thousands centuries later, during the building of the Panama Canal. From the first hour on, the path into the untrodden land must be hacked through the poisonous jungle of vines with axe and sword. As if passing through an enormous green mine, the first men in the troop cut a narrow tunnel through the tangle for the others, through which then the army of the conquistador passes, man after man, in an endlessly long line, with weapons constantly at hand, always, day and night, with senses watchfully tuned to fight off a sudden attack by the natives. The heat becomes stifling in the humid, musty darkness beneath the damply arching giant trees above which the sun burns mercilessly. Covered with sweat, with parched lips, the troops drag on mile after mile in their heavy armor. Then suddenly sheets of rain dash down again with hurricane force. In no time at all small creeks become rushing rivers that must either be forded or crossed on swaying raffia bridges that have quickly been improvised by the Indians. For food the Spaniards have nothing but a handful of corn. Worn out from lack of sleep, hungry, thirsty, swarmed by myriads of stinging, bloodsucking insects, they work their way forward, wearing clothes torn by thorns, with sore feet, their eyes feverish and their cheeks swollen from the bites of humming mosquitoes, restless during the day, sleepless at night, and soon completely exhausted. After the first week of the march the majority of the men can no long er stand the strain, and Nuñez de Balboa, who knows that the real dangers still await them, issues orders for all who are feverish and unable to march to stay behind. He intends to risk the decisive adventure with only the most select of his troops.

Finally the terrain begins to rise. The jungle, which can un fold all of its tropical opulence only in the swampy lowlands, be comes lighter. But now that shade no longer protects them, the equatorial sun directly overhead glows down harshly and sharply on their heavy armor. Slowly and in short stages the exhausted men are able to climb the hills step by step to that chain of mountains that divides the narrow span between the two oceans like a stone backbone. Gradually the view becomes less obstructed; at night the air becomes fresh. After eighteen days of heroic effort the greatest difficulty seems to have been overcome; be fore them rises the crest of the mountain range, from the top of which, according to the statement of the Indian guide, one can look out over both oceans, the Atlantic and the still unknown and unnamed Pacific.

But now, just when the tough, treacherous resistance of nature seems to have been vanquished once and for all, another enemy opposes them: the Indian chief of that province with hundreds of his warriors to prevent the strangers from passing through. But Nuñez de Balboa has been thoroughly tested in battle with the Indians. It suffices to fire off a salvo from the harquebuses, and again the artificial lightning and thunder exercise their reliable magical power over the natives. Screaming, the terrified men flee, chased by the Spaniards and the bloodhounds who storm after them. But instead of taking plea sure in the easy victory, Balboa, like all Spanish conquistadors, brings dishonor upon it through deplorable cruelty by letting a number of defenseless, bound prisoners as a substitute for bullfights and gladiator sport be torn apart, slashed to pieces, and mangled by the pack of hungry bloodhounds. A repulsive slaughter desecrates the last night before Nuñez de Balboa’s immortal day.

A unique, inexplicable mixture lies in the character and nature of these Spanish conquistadors. As pious and faithful as Christians ever were, they fervently call upon God from their hearts and at the same time commit in his name the vilest brutalities in human history. Capable of the most magnificent and heroic attainments of courage, sacrifice, and endurance, they deceive and fight among themselves in the most shameless manner. Yet, on the other hand, amid their contemptuousness they have a distinct sense of honor and a wonderful, truly admirable understanding of the historical greatness of their task. The same Nuñez de Balboa who threw innocent, bound, defenseless prisoners to the hunting dogs and perhaps in satisfaction stroked the beasts’ flews as they still dripped with fresh human blood – this same man knows precisely the meaning of his deed within the history of mankind, and at the critical moment he finds one of those magnificent gestures that remain unforgettable through the ages. He knows that this 25th of September will be an important day in world history, and with wonderful Spanish pathos this hardened, unscrupulous adventurer manifests how fully he grasps the meaning of his timeless mission.

Balboa’s grand gesture: in the evening, immediately after the blood bath, one of the natives points out a nearby peak to him and tells him that from its top one can already see the ocean, the unknown Mar del Sur. Balboa immediately gives his orders. He leaves the wounded and exhausted men in the plundered village and commands the men who are still able to march – in all there are sixty-seven left of the original hundred and ninety with whom he began the march in Darien – to climb that mountain. At nearly ten o’clock in the morning they are close to the top. Only a small, bare projection remains to be climbed; then the view must expand into infinity.

At that moment Balboa commands the men to stop. Nobody is supposed to follow him, for he does not intend to share this first sighting of the unknown ocean with anyone. Alone and unique, he intends to be and remain for all eternity the first Spaniard, the first European, the first Christian who, after having crossed the one enormous ocean of our world, the Atlantic, now also sees the other one, the still unknown Pacific.

Slowly, with his heart pounding, deeply filled with the importance of the moment, he climbs upward with the flag in his left hand, the sword in his right, a lonely silhouette against the vastness of the earth. Slowly he climbs upward without hurrying, for the real work is already finished. Only a few more steps, fewer, fewer and fewer, and really, now that he has reached the summit, a vast view opens before him. Beyond the downward sloping mountains, the wooded and green decline of the hills, lies an endless, enormous, metallically reflecting surface, the ocean, the ocean, the new, the unknown ocean of which men un til now have only dreamed and never seen, the fabulous ocean that Columbus and all those who came after him sought for years and years in vain, whose waves wash against America, India, and China. And Vasco Nuñez de Balboa looks and looks and looks, proudly and happily drinking in the awareness that his eyes are the first of a European to reflect the infinite blue of this ocean.

Long and ecstatically Vasco Nuñez de Balboa looks into the distance. Only then does he call his comrades, his friends to join him, to share in his pride. Agitated, excited, wheezing and yelling, they climb, clamber, run up the hill, stare and marvel and point with enthusiastic eyes. Suddenly the priest accompanying them, Andres de Vara, begins singing the Te Deum laudamus, and immediately the clamor and yelling subsides. All the hard and hoarse voices of these soldiers, adventurers, and bandits unite in the pious chant. In amazement the Indians watch them cut down a tree at a word from the priest, to erect a cross into the wood of which they carve the initials of the king of Spain. And when this cross now rises, it is as if its two wooden arms want to take hold of both seas, the Atlantic and the Pacific Ocean, with all of their invisible distant reaches.

Amid the awesome silence Nuñez de Balboa steps forward and makes a speech to his soldiers. They were doing the right thing in thanking God who gave them this honor and grace, and in asking him to continue to help them to conquer this sea and all of these lands. If they continued to follow him faithfully as they had done in the past, then they would return from this new India as the wealthiest of Spaniards. Solemnly he waves the flag to the four winds to make Spanish possessions of all the distant regions that those winds pass by. Then he calls the scribe, Andres de Valderrabano, to have him create a document that de scribes this solemn act for all time. Andres de Valderrabano unrolls a parchment he has carried it through the jungle in a closed wooden box with an ink container and a quill pen and calls upon all the noblemen and knights and soldiers los caballeros e hidalgos y hombres de bien – “who were present at the discovery of the southern ocean, the Mar del Sur, by the august and highly respected gentleman Captain Vasco Nuñez de Balboa, His Majesty’s governor,” to confirm that “it was this Mr. Vasco Nuñez who was first to see this ocean and showed it to those who followed him.”

Then the sixty-seven men climb down the hill, and beginning on this September 25, 1513 mankind knows about the last, previously unknown ocean of the earth.



Gold and Pearls



Now certainty has been achieved. They have seen the ocean. But now to go down to its coast, to feel the wet flood, to touch it, to feel it, to taste it, and to gather booty from its shore! The climb down takes two days, and so that when he arrives he will know the quickest way from the mountains to the sea, Nuñez de Balboa divides his men into individual groups. The third of these groups, under Alonzo Martin, is the first to reach the shore, and even the simple soldiers in this group of adventurers are so filled with the vanity of fame, with the thirst for immortality, that even the simple man Alonzo Martin immediately has the scribe certify in black and white that he was the first to bathe his foot and his hand in these still nameless waters. Only after having thus endowed his ego with a grain of immortality does he report to Balboa that he has reached the ocean, has touched its flow with his own hand.

Balboa immediately prepares himself for a new bombastic gesture. The next day, on the feast day of St. Michael, he appears on the beach, accompanied by only twenty-two companions, himself armed and girded like St. Michael, to take posses sion of the new ocean in a solemn ceremony. He does not immediately stride into the waters, but as their lord and master he arrogantly waits resting beneath a tree until the rising tide casts its wave up to him and licks his feet like an obedient dog would do with its tongue. Only then does he stand up, throw the shield upon his back so that it glistens like a mirror in the sun, take his sword in one hand, the flag of Castile with its picture of the Mother of God in the other, and walk into the water. Only when the waves wash around his hips and he has placed himself completely within these enormous, foreign waters does Nuñez de Balboa, formerly a rebel and desperado, now the most loyal servant of his king and a triumphant man, swing the banner in all directions and while so doing cry out with a loud voice: “Long live the exalted and powerful monarchs Ferdinand and Joanna of Castile, León, and Aragón, in whose names and for the benefit of the royal crown of Castile I take real and physical and permanent possession of all these seas and lands and coasts and harbors and islands. And if any prince or other captain, Christian, or heathen of whatever religion or station should lay any claim to these lands and seas, I swear to defend them in the name of the kings of Castile, whose possession they are, now and for all time, as long as the world shall stand and until the day of the Final Judgment.”

All the Spaniards repeat the oath, and for a moment their words drown out the loud rumbling of the waters. Each wets his lips with the ocean water, and once again the scribe Andrés de Valderrabano records the act of taking possession and ends his document with the words: “These twenty-two men and the scribe Andrés de Valderrabano were the first Christians to set foot in the Mar del Sur, and all of them touched the water with their hands and wetted their mouths with it to see if it was salt water like that of the other ocean. And when they saw that I was so, they gave their thanks to God.”

The great deed is finished. Now it is a matter of deriving earthly gain from the heroic undertaking. The Spaniards obtain some gold from some of the natives through theft or trade. But amid their triumph a new surprise awaits them. The Indians bring them whole handfuls of precious pearls that are found in extravagant plenty on the nearby islands. Among them is one called the Pelegrina, which Cervantes and Lope de Vega sang about because it adorned the royal crown of Spain and England as one of the most beautiful of all pearls. The Spaniards stuff all their pockets, all their sacks full of these treasures that are valued here little more than sea shells and sand, and when they greedily continue to ask about the thing that is most important to them in the world, about gold, one of the Indian chiefs points over to the south where the line of the mountains blurs into the horizon. There, he declares, lies a land with immeasurable treasures. The rulers eat out of golden vessels, and large, four-legged animals – the Indian chief means the llamas – carry the most magnificent burdens to the king’s treasuries. And he gives the name of the country that lies in the ocean to the south and beyond the mountains. It sounds like Bini, melodic and foreign.

Vasco Nuñez de Balboa stares off into the distance in the direction pointed by the chief’s outstretched hand, where the pale mountains lose themselves in the sky. The soft, seductive word Biru has immediately written itself upon his soul. His heart hammers restlessly. For the second time in his life he has unexpectedly received a great promise. The first message, Comagre’s message about the nearby ocean, has been fulfilled. He has found the beach of pearls and the Mar del Sur; perhaps he will also succeed with the second one, the discovery, the conquest of the Inca empire, the gold country of this world.



Seldom do the gods grant...



Nuñez de Balboa still stares longingly into the distance. Like a golden bell the word Biru, Peru vibrates through his soul. But – painful abandonment! – this time he cannot risk further exploration. One cannot conquer an empire with two or three dozen exhausted men. So, first back to Darien and at some later time, with collected forces, he can take the newly discovered road to the new Ophir. But this march back becomes no less arduous. Once again the Spaniards must fight their way through the jungle, once again survive the attacks of the natives. And it is no longer a military troop, but a small troop of men who stagger along on their last strength, ill with fever – Balboa himself is near death and is carried by the Indians in a hammock – that arrives again in Darien on January 19, 1514, after four months of the most terrible exertions. But one of the greatest deeds of history has been done. Balboa has kept his promise; every participant who risked the way with him into the unknown has be come rich. His soldiers have brought home treasures from the coast of the southern ocean as Columbus and the other conquistadors never did, and all the other colonists also receive their share. A fifth is made ready for the crown, and nobody holds it against the triumphant man, that while dividing the spoils he also lets his dog Leoncico participate in the remuneration like any other warrior. He receives five hundred gold pesos as his reward for so valiantly tearing the flesh from the bodies of the natives. After such an accomplishment, not a single person in the colony challenges his authority as governor any longer. The adventurer and rebel is celebrated like a god, and with pride he can dispatch the news to Spain that he has performed the greatest deed for the Castilian crown since Columbus. In a steep climb the sun of his good fortune has broken through all the clouds that have burden ed his life for a long time. Now it stands at its zenith

But Balboa’s good fortune has only brief duration. A few months later the populace of Darien presses its way to the shore on a radiant June day. A sail has flashed up on the horizon, and even that is like a miracle in this lost corner of the world. But look, a second appears next to it, a third, a fourth, a fifth, and soon it is ten, no, fifteen, no, twenty, an entire fleet that is steer ing toward the harbor. And soon they learn: all this has been caused by Nuñez de Balboa’s letter, but not the message of his triumph – that has not yet arrived in Spain – rather that earlier report in which he passed on for the first time the chiefs account about the nearby southern ocean and the land of gold and requested an army of a thousand men to conquer those lands. For this expedition the Spanish crown did not hesitate to equip a powerful fleet. But not for a moment did the authorities in Seville and Barcelona consider entrusting such an important task to such an ill-reputed adventurer and rebel as Vasco Nuñez de Balboa. A personal governor, a wealthy, noble, highly respected, sixty-year-old man, Pedro Arias Davilla, usually called Pedro Arias, is sent along to bring order to the colony at last as the king’s governor, to exercise justice for all previously committed crimes, to find that southern ocean, and to conquer the promised land of gold.

This results now in an annoying situation for Pedro Arias. On the one hand, he has the assignment to call the rebel Nuñez de Balboa to account for the earlier banishment of the governor and, if his guilt is proven, to place him in chains or to execute him. On the other hand, he has the assignment to discover the southern ocean. But hardly has his boat touched land when he learns that this very Nuñez de Balboa, whom he is supposed to try in court, has done the great deed on his own initiative, that this rebel has already celebrated the triumph that was intended for him and has performed the greatest service for the Spanish crown since the discovery of America. Of course now he cannot place the head of such a man on the block like that of a common criminal. He must greet him politely and congratulate him honestly. But from this moment on Nuñez de Balboa is lost. Pedro Arias will never forgive his rival for having independently carried out the deed that he was sent to complete and that would have secured eternal fame for him through the ages. To be sure, in order not to provoke the colonists prematurely, he must hide his hatred toward their hero. The investigation is postponed, and a false peace is even established, in that Pedro Arias engages his own daughter, who has remained behind in Spain, to Nuñez de Balboa. But his hatred and his jealousy toward Balboa are not alleviated at all. They are only increased even more when now from Spain, where they have finally learned of Balboa’s deed, a decree arrives that awards the former rebel the usurped title after the fact, also appoints Balboa governor, and gives Pedro Arias the assignment to consult with him in every important matter. This land is too small for two governors. One will have to yield, one of the two will have to perish. Vasco Nuñez de Balboa senses that the sword hangs over him, for in Pedro Arias’s hands lie the military power and the judicial system. So for the second time he tries the flight that succeeded so magnificently for him the first time, the flight into immortality. He seeks permission from Pedro Arias to outfit an expedition to explore the coast of the southern ocean and to conquer in a broader area. But the secret intention of the old rebel is to become independent of any control on the other shore of the ocean, to build his own fleet, to become lord of his own province, and if possible also to conquer the fabulous Bini, that Ophir of the New World. Maliciously, Pedro Arias agrees. If Balboa perishes in the undertaking, all the better. If he succeeds in his deed there will still be time to get rid of the all too ambitious man.

With that, Nuñez de Balboa begins his new flight into immortality. His second undertaking is perhaps even more grandiose than the first, even if it was not given the same glory in history, which always praises only the successful. This time Balboa crosses the isthmus not only with his men, but he has the wood, the boards, the rigging, the sails, the anchors, the winches for four brigantines carried over the mountains by thousands of natives. For, once he has a fleet over there, then he can take possession of all the coasts and conquer the pearl islands and Peru, the fabulous Peru.

But this time fate is against the daring man, and he constantly encounters new resistance. On the march through the moist jungle worms eat the wood; the boards arrive rotten and cannot be used. Without letting himself become discouraged, on the Gulf of Panama Balboa has fresh trees cut down and new boards made. His energy performs true miracles – everything seems to have succeeded; the brigantines are already built, the first ones of the Pacific Ocean. Then suddenly a tornado sends enormous amounts of water rushing down the rivers in which they lie ready. The finished ships are torn away and are wrecked in the ocean. They have to begin again a third time, and now finally they succeed in preparing two brigantines. Balboa needs only two more, only three more, and he can leave and conquer the land of which he has dreamed day and night since the time when that Indian chief pointed to the south with his outstretched hand and he heard the seductive word Bini for the first time. He only has to have a few brave officers sent to him, request a substantial reinforcement of men, and he can establish his empire! Just a few more months, just a little luck added to his inner audacity, and it would not be Pizarro whom world history would have to call the victor over the Incas, the conqueror of Peru, but Nuñez de Balboa. But fate never proves to be all too generous, even with its favorites. Seldom do the gods grant a mortal more than one single immortal deed.



Destruction



Nuñez de Balboa prepares for his great undertaking with iron energy. But the very fact of his bold success creates danger for him, for the distrustful eye of Pedro Arias observes the designs of his subordinate with alarm. Perhaps through betrayal he receives news of Balboa’s ambitious dreams of domination; perhaps he simply jealously fears a second success of the old rebel. In any case he suddenly sends a very cordial letter to Balboa asking him to come back to Acla, a town near Darien, for a conference, be fore he finally begins his march of conquest. Balboa, who hopes to receive from Pedro Arias additional support in the form of men, accepts the invitation and immediately returns. Before the gates of the city a small troop of soldiers marches toward him, apparently to greet him. Joyfully he hurries toward them to em brace their leader, his comrade of many years, his companion during the discovery of the southern ocean, his close friend Francisco Pizarro.

But Francisco Pizarro places a heavy hand on his shoulder and declares him a prisoner. Pizarro, too, lusts for immortality; he, too, lusts to conquer the land of gold, and perhaps it is not unpleasant for him to have such an audacious man in front of him out of the way. The governor Pedro Arias opens the trial for alleged rebellion; the case is conducted quickly and unjustly. A few days later Vasco Nuñez de Balboa walks to the block with the most faithful of his comrades. The executioner’s sword glints, and in a second the head rolls down and the light goes out forever in the eyes of the first human being to see simultaneously both oceans that envelop our world.







